2020). Several ambitious connectomics projects are currently
underway, such as the IARPA MICrONS program and the
FlyEM project, a multi-lab, multi-year effort which has produced
one of the largest and most complete connectomes to date
(Dorkenwald et al., 2019; Scheffer et al., 2020; Schneider-
Mizell et al., 2020). However, due to the incredible challenge
of producing a high-fidelity connectome, only limited volumes
of the brain have been mapped so far. This demonstrates
the ongoing challenge of imaging synapses at the nanoscale
resolution and the need for vast improvements in imaging
techniques and technology before connectome reconstruction
reaches its full potential.
The speed and resource limitations of traditional methods of
connectome reconstruction have significant drawbacks for the
usefulness of the connectomes generated. The brain is a highly
dynamic structure, and although some synapses and spines are
relatively stable, others frequently reassemble, sometimes on
the scale of hours (Berry and Nedivi, 2017). A connectome
merely represents a snapshot of a brain in a moment in time,
and to truly understand the connectivity of an organism, a
single connectome will not suffice. Moreover, the connectomes
of individual organisms may differ greatly and sometimes
unexpectedly (Bergmann et al., 2020; Witvliet et al., 2020).
Furthermore, merely knowing the number of synapses that
connect two neurons does not provide all of the necessary
information for understanding the function of the synapse. The
molecular identity of the synapse is incredibly diverse and reveals
essential information such as synaptic type and strength, without
which a full vision of connectivity cannot be developed, and
unfortunately, EM preparation techniques are largely incapable
of preserving molecular identity (O’Rourke et al., 2012). On the
other hand, optical microscopy is well suited for imaging large
samples at high-throughput and compatible with multiplexed
imaging required for revealing the molecular identity of synapses.
Indeed, high-throughput optical imaging approaches, such as
FAST, MOST, and tiling light sheet microscopy, have been
already used for whole-brain imaging (Gong et al., 2016; Seiriki
et al., 2017; Motta et al., 2019; Winnubst et al., 2019; Chen
et al., 2020; Zhong et al., 2021). However, in this case, the
resolution is limited by the diffraction of light and thus not
sufficient for mapping synaptic connections. Super-resolution
microscopy can break the diffraction limit of light but at the
cost of greatly reduced throughput and the need for thin
sample slicing to maintain point spread function (Sahl et al.,
2017; Schermelleh et al., 2019). Expansion Microscopy (ExM),
a recently developed tissue processing technique, allows for
the imaging of biological specimens at the voxel rates of a
diffraction-limited microscope, but with the voxel sizes of a
super-resolution microscope (Chen F. et al., 2015; Tillberg
et al., 2016). This makes ExM a form of super-resolution
microscopy, which relies on swellable polymers to physically
expand tissues before imaging (Chen F. et al., 2015). Physical
magnification of the specimen occurs at the nanoscale by
separating biomolecules, thus enabling subdiffraction limit
resolution under a conventional microscope (Tillberg et al.,
2016). Here, the authors would like to note that the first method
that resulted in brain tissue expansion was reported by Miyawaki
and colleagues in 2011 (Hama et al., 2011). However, it was
not realized as a way to improve the spatial resolution of
imaging until 2015 when Boyden and colleagues introduced the
concept of ExM.
ExM has several crucial advantages over EM that make it
particularly well suited for visualizing the synapse, particularly
for large-scale projects like connectome mapping. For example,
the time, labor, equipment, and skill demands of an ExM
experiment are substantially less than that of an EM experiment
(Wassie et al., 2019). ExM also is compatible with conventional
molecular labeling tools and maintains optical microscopy’s
ability to image in color, allowing for the use of several
fluorescent probes at once or sequentially, thus enabling
multiplexing as well as revealing the molecular identity of the
synapse in situ (Chen F. et al., 2015; Ku et al., 2016; Wassie
et al., 2019; Alon et al., 2021; Payne et al., 2021). ExM is
compatible with a wide variety of tissue types and has been
used to image brain tissue in many of neuroscience’s most
widely used model organisms (Freifeld et al., 2017; Gao R. et al.,
2019; Yu et al., 2020) and in monkey specimens (Zhao et al.,
2017). ExM has already been successfully utilized to image neural
connectivity at the resolution of the single synapse. For example,
Gao R. et al. (2019) used ExM in tandem with lattice lightsheet
microscopy to visualize synaptic proteins and neuronal
morphology at nanoscale resolution in the mouse cortex and
Drosophila brain. Shen et al. (2020) also recently used ExM
combined with fluorescent labeling and antibody staining to
trace likely synaptic connections in neurons while preserving
cell-type specific molecular information. There is tremendous
potential for ExM to revolutionize the way synapses are imaged
and studied. The technology has produced visually stunning
results of brain tissue in a variety of model organisms, and
most ExM protocols are substantially more compatible with the
high-throughput approach needed to tackle the problems of
connectomics and beyond in the future.
We start by reviewing the ExM methods that have
been already applied for synaptic mapping and imaging
using immunostaining and fluorescent protein-based neuronal
labeling and tracing, which facilitates assigning synapses to
their parent neurons. We also discuss major challenges and
limitations of the currently available ExM methods regarding the
comprehensive optical connectome. We then summarize some
major molecular strategies for visualizing the synapse at high
resolution that can be used in combination with ExM for optical
connectome. The first strategy involves fusing synaptic scaffold
proteins, such as PSD-95, gephyrin, and synaptophysin, with
fluorescent markers. Many tools are variations of this general
technique and are widely used both for live imaging and for
fixed sample preps, and we feature the most commonly used
and the most promising for ExM below. The second strategy
involves the use of intrabody-based probes known as FingRs,
which bind to synaptic scaffold proteins. Although FingRs are
a much newer and less established technology than tagged
scaffold proteins, they have several key features that make them
more suitable for certain applications. We finalize the review by
providing experimental considerations and perspectives on ExM
technology.
